I think the process is just inherently much messier than that.
And you need to let go a little bit and say,
the tool is going to help you make this stew and then you'll sleep on it for a
few days. And then somewhere else, something new will pop out.
Hello and welcome to Metamuse.
Muse is software for your iPad that helps you with ideation and problem-solving.
But this podcast isn't about Muse the product it's about Muse, the company,
and the small team behind it. I'm Mark McGranaghan.
And I'm here today with my colleague, Adam Wiggins. How's it going, Adam?
Going pretty good, Mark. I just got back from a short trip up to the Baltic sea,
which is a pretty easy train ride from where I live in Berlin.
This is the first real trip I've taken since I guess pandemic started so about
six, six, seven months.
And it was really refreshing even though it was just a couple days.
And I was reminded of something you said when we, uh,
I think it was in our very second episode of the podcast about having good
ideas,
which is how fresh surroundings refresh your brain creatively. And yeah,
I had that there and it was really,
it was really that came to mind because I was really reminded of how much I,
I missed that in this time where travel is not a part of our lives,
the way it used to be.
Yeah. I'm always surprised by how powerful that effect is.
So today our topic is tools for thought. Now, Adam, what does that mean for you?
Tools for thought means a lot of things to me,
but I think the first place my head goes to is Howard Rheingold's classic book
from, I think it was the eighties where he details Xerox PARC and
many of these visionary folks who are thinking about computing and it's early
days and what that could do for humans and our creative and productive
lives.
But I actually stepped back even a little bit from there because the original
tools for thought I feel like are anything that lets you externalize your
thoughts. And so pen and paper, you know, writing language, uh,
is the starting place there. The printing press, maybe, uh,
but more in modern times, things like sketchbooks or I don't know,
in a startup office,
you've got whiteboards and a school you've got chalkboards post-it notes are a
great tool for thought fact,
because you can write down these little snippets of information and move them
around, maybe in a physical space with colleagues. Um,
there's even something like I remembered a team summit.
We had a few years back might've been even been there in the park in Seattle.
You wanted to illustrate a point and ended up grabbing a stick and basically
drawing a very simple diagram in the dirt. Right?
So anything that lets you really either make visual or somehow
externalize what's in your mind, I think is, is a type of tool for thought.
And that also includes, I think the, call it, the consumption side,
which is what I usually call active reading.
So book and a highlighter together,
I think is a type of tool for thought the act of
highlighting passages that you find impactful or relevant to what you're trying
to learn about makes this,
learning this reading process into an active process and a learning one.
And that, that becomes a tool for thought as well.
Yeah.
And I'm sure we'll dive into a lot of different kind of specific instantiations
of tools for thought.
But another way to think about this is what is the problem you're trying to
solve here? Two possibilities. One would be,
you're trying to obtain the knowledge that has already been generated by someone
else. You're trying to learn some facts, memorize some figures,
maybe retain some ideas and different tools for thought can help you with that.
Another angle would be, you're trying to generate new ideas, novel thoughts,
and a tool might help you accomplish that as well.
And I think actually which one you're trying to do is quite important for which
tool you choose.
Yeah.
Another reference I was looking up in prep for this episode was Andy mapped
checks work and he's got a,
a piece called how do we develop transformative tools for thought?
And his work has current research track is more on that learning retaining
side of things, these pneumonic devices and so on.
This is a nice article I'll link into the show notes because he does on the
later part of the article, he describes a lot of this history,
particularly around the computing tools for thought Steve jobs and the bicycle
for the mind. Uh, he talks about that. He thinks quoting Alan Kay who's,
who's one of the, sort of the big visionaries in this world, uh,
as saying that actually medium for thought in some cases might be a better,
better preterm, but for whatever reason, the, uh,
the tools for thought seems to be the label that, that stock. So Andy's work,
I think is a good example of the, how do you,
how do you get more out of what you're trying to learn about?
And then there's the having ideas or generating new thoughts or generating
original ideas, which is obviously the space muse is trying to play in.
Or at least we're trying to create a tool that can help the end user to have
better ideas to develop their ideas. So, yeah,
coming back to the digital space,
the tools for thought book spends time on, for example,
the Xerox park lab that invented a lot of the modern gooey operating system and
other things that we sort of take for granted in the modern computing world.
There's also folks like Doug Engelbart and his vision to augment human intellect
as people like Alan Kay,
who invented small talk and object oriented programming had this vision for a
thing called the Dynabook that I guess you could say physically looked a lot
like an iPad looks today,
but was more focused on the creative and productive uses of computing
and there's even stuff like of,
or folks like the neevr Bush who wrote an essay that people still quote today
from the 1940s about this thing called the Memex or this vision he had for a
thing called the Memex.
And I think one thing you get when people talk about these, uh,
the anger of arts and Ks and bushes,
they're often sort of lamenting a future that maybe we were dreaming
of in these times,
that then you look at today's computing and for all the really impressive
technology that we have and all the things that computers and software and the
internet can do for us.
In some ways we didn't really fulfill some of the beautiful vision that these
folks had. In fact, I think some of those folks were even in some ways,
a bit bitter, you know, towards the end of their careers,
when they see all these startups and whatever,
putting all this money into these shiny products that in fact are more kind of
entertainment boxes,
rather than something designed to really elevate the human race.
Yeah. And Andy makes a point in his,
in his article that there are good economic reasons why that's the case or why
we would expect that to be the case, uh,
essentially because new ideas and tools for thought are sort of public good.
So it's hard to capture economic value when you make innovations in that space.
Um, but we still think it's possible, uh,
both to have new ideas here and to build a business around it.
If we fast forward a little bit from the Halcyon days of these,
these computing visionaries in the sixties, seventies and eighties,
a little bit more to when personal computing became commonplace,
maybe the 1990s. And I think what you see is when you,
or at least when I think of productivity software really broadly speaking,
I tend to think of offering what I usually call offering applications.
This is something like use illustrator.
If you're a designer or use Microsoft word, if you're a writer or use Excel,
if you're a financial analyst, these are really designed for an end artifact,
you're producing something to be consumed by someone else when you type into
your word processor it's because eventually you want to publish that book or
publish an article online.
I think folks often do use these offering tools for the thinking phase.
If you've ever opened your word processor or a programmer,
maybe uses a text editor or something like that to sketch down some ideas,
not with the intention of that's ever going to be given to someone else,
but to get your own your own head together, just because that's the tool,
you know how to use it's right there, but it's not really designed fat. In fact,
in a way it's a, it's a poor fit. You just happen to know about it.
And it seems from a really creative uses, uh, certainly on the,
for people that like laying things out visually and spatially, kind of like we,
we strive for, with muse. We've seen, for example, um,
we saw someone that did a masters,
did all their master's thesis research in illustrator.
Cause they wanted to lay out all these papers.
They were reading and the excerpts they were taking from them and how they all
connect together. They want it on this big spatial canvas.
And it turns out that illustrator was the best choice for that at that time.
Maybe nowadays people do that with Figma, somewhat,
which I think is great that people are doing these innovative uses,
but that was part of what led to the impetus for us wanting to build a tool for
thought that was more something that's purpose built for enhancing the
individuals or even a group's thinking now in practice,
because we've seen so few commercial tools for thought.
I wonder if that means that either people don't value that ideation step enough
to want to invest in that. So that's, you know, monetarily,
do they want to for software,
but it's also just taking the time to learn a piece of software or to put your
data and your thoughts into a piece of software when that's not the end place
it's going to be. Um, so I think that's, that's certainly a, you know,
a risk or an open question for muse and really anyone else that's working on a,
uh, on a tool for thought.
Yeah,
I do think there's a commercial piece there where the obviously biggest market
is when you're close to the end product that you're producing for a business or
you're producing a presentation and you're producing a book there's obvious
economic value that you want to attach to that.
And there's a bunch of a bunch of people who obviously need to do that.
Yeah. And I th I think that's most notable when you,
when you try to sell software to professionals,
if you say one of the best pitches you can offer is this will make you look
really good to your client.
You will close more deals or you will impress your boss,
or you will get that big, that big deal that you're trying to do.
And so presentation software, or really good financial modeling, or,
you know, the word processor that's, that's the value there is,
is really clear to people.
If you say this will make your ideas better or make your decisions better,
for some reason that that's a less poignant sales pitch, I think, yeah.
I keep coming back to this idea that there's an incomplete understanding of the
creative process.
We've long advocated for this three step process where you're one gathering
raw materials to actively reading processing, ruminating,
brainstorming on those materials and then three offering an end product.
I think a lot of people think of the creative process as one in three,
because there's obvious physical content that you're dealing with in each of
those cases. Like you have to pull in some raw material to like,
say it in your paper and you have to produce a paper at the end to send to the
publisher, but you can kind of get away without doing the middle step without,
you know, thinking, um, or you can just do it all in your head.
But the premise with muse is that there's a,
a very powerful and important second step there that with the right tooling
support can give you even more power as a thinker.
One place, the tools for thought has come back into the current conversation,
uh, is the product roam research.
Who's been getting a lot of traction among people who I think like to think
deeply, particularly built around a daily journaling practice,
which I think is a really a good way to get your thoughts out in a freeform
way. Uh,
one of the things I remember them complaining about that's the right way to put
it is being trapped in this category of note.
Taking note taking is an interesting category because it seems to span a lot of
things. You've got a classic like Evernote,
which in theory should be kind of a tool for thought it's supposed to be sort of
a second brain. You put stuff into it, you can find it later,
but the reality is it doesn't necessarily help you find connections.
I think it sort of failed to deliver on that promise.
It's maybe more of a knowledge base or knowledge store. I use Dropbox for that,
for example. And I think that's true for a lot of notes, apps,
things we've talked about here before something like a bear, for example,
it's a really nice way to quickly capture a thought, you know,
on your smartphone and then you have access to later,
but it's not really a place to do a lot of deep ideation. I don't know.
Maybe you sketch down a few thoughts you have in bullet point form,
but it's not a good place for really freeform ideation.
And maybe that's a place where Rome is helping change things a little bit. Uh,
I also see this tool for thought, uh,
sometimes applied to some other hot new products, which include notion,
which is more of a team Wiki team, brain kind of thing.
But I think it can fit with that as well. Figma, as previously mentioned,
sometimes people use it as this kind of visual canvas,
even something like air table, which is a spreadsheet, but often again,
people use it in these team context to capture knowledge, uh,
and to basically find shared understanding on the team it's not intended for.
There's no end artifact for the client. Uh,
it's more internal to what the team's own sense of understanding of problem
space.
Now what's interesting to me is why are tools like this useful tools for
thought? I think some people would say it's because for example,
you can capture and store all this information and you can form explicit links
between them and everything is organized and searchable.
And I think there's something to that there's certainly value in that use case.
But I believe that most of the creative work, the mind does,
especially around generating new ideas is not done in your thinking mind.
It's basically not done consciously.
You have this massively parallel process running in your background,
including when you're sleeping, that's generating new ideas, forming,
forming new connections. And you basically can't think your way.
Can't put one foot in front of the other to get to new ideas like that.
You have to just kind of let it go wild and hope it comes up with something.
And the way you feed that process is you ruminate over a lot of interesting
intellectual material.
So the reason I think these apps are useful for Tucson is twofold.
One is people like to use them.
They just like to spend time writing notes and Rome,
and kind of regardless of where those notes end up,
where if you ever read them again, just the process of writing and thinking,
as you're writing generates a lot of fodder for this process in your,
in your sleeping mind. And number two,
increasingly these tools support multimedia,
and I've long said creative thinking never takes just one medium.
It's never just texts or just images and tools like Figma.
It's very easy to make a canvas where you have images and text and vector
graphics and so on all in one place. I think that's important because that's,
again, naturally how the mind thinks creatively.
Sure. I'm a big believer in the, as you said, feeding the sleeping mind problem,
working on problems in the background, stewing and yeah, this externalizing,
your thoughts in some form is a way that helps you turn it over.
And that can be lots of different forms. It can be sketching.
It can be writing voice memoing is another interesting trick.
Even just talking to another person, right? This is where an open-ended chat,
you know, the classic water cooler talk,
or just taking a walk and talking with a colleague,
working through something that, that helps seed that, uh, that stewing,
that background process in the brain. And I agree, whatever it is,
should be enjoyable and comfortable. And so that means for, uh, something like,
and one of these analog tools.
I think the reason why sketchbooks and mole skins and whatever have continued to
have such a place in the heart of creative people like me and many others is
that they're just enjoyable.
You grew up a nice pen and the feeling that tactile feeling of your,
your hand moving across the page,
I think whiteboards good whiteboard can have a similar feeling as well.
And with digital tools you need, you need the same thing.
If it's fun and enjoyable to open a new notion page and assign it an emoji
and dragon,
some media and type out your text and then share it with a colleague for
discussion, then you're going to want to do it.
And then that in turn is a nice virtuous cycle.
Yeah. And this is a podcast about tools for thought,
and I think it's appropriate to, you know, keep it scoped.
But I would say that human creative process is so much bigger than tools.
Things like, uh, the social element, you know,
who you're talking to and who you're motivated by, uh, the physicality element,
the position of your body,
how it's moving or not the location element like we were talking about in the
intro, these are all super important.
And I think it's easy for us as technologists to over-rotate towards what's on
the rectangular screen when there's so much more to the creative process.
And again, that's something we've tried to tap into with muse.
So that for example, you can use it while you're reclining on your comfy couch,
or you can use both your hands at the same time and use all the degrees of
freedom you have in your arms. Things like that.
Absolutely. Related to that.
One thing I wanted to ask you about is whether you'd read this book thinking
fast and slow by Daniel Conaman yep. Classic. Yeah.
I found myself thinking about that in this tools of thought context.
So just to briefly summarize for, uh, for those that are not familiar,
the author basically categorizes our ways of thinking in daily life.
In these two creatively named system one and system two brains where
system one is more the, the fast thinking, the, the quick judgment,
the immediate reaction and the system two brain is slower, more analytical.
I especially like the system one brains main,
the framing that the system one brains main job is this assessing normality.
They call it. That is to say,
we have these built in habits and assumptions about the world is worldview in
this,
just this way that we expect things to be everything from how my furniture is
arranged in my home,
to what the political landscape is like in my nation,
our system one brains are constantly taking stock of whether what they're seeing
fits into that established pattern and essentially kind of raises a flag or
raises something into our attention when something breaks that pattern.
So that system one fast instinctive emotional brain,
I think is pretty natural to reach for in certainly in social settings,
but especially in information, age style, um,
online gathering places, the social media and so on.
Whereas the system too is obviously what we're most interested in,
in our team and with the tool for thought that we're building,
which is the slower, more deliberate, more logical, analytical, slower,
both in a literal time sense,
but also in a sense of more consideration and purposely
breaking the habits that are already in your mind and trying to form new
connections.
Yeah, I think that's true, but I also think there's value and domesticating,
if you will, the system one mind, it's so powerful, but it's also by default,
very wild and instinctual. But if you give it the right care and feeding with,
uh, the,
the right intellectual material that you're ruminating on to continue the animal
metaphor here, um, it can be very powerful. And again,
I think this is especially true in your sleep basically,
where if you take in the right materials, do the right active reading.
And if you give that a few days,
you'll often form interesting new connections and ideas.
For me, a go-to technique is to literally sleep on it. And in fact,
I've even brought this up often enough on teams.
Sometimes that people poke fun at me,
that my solution to any tough problem is to go to sleep.
But I really find that so many breakthrough solutions or new
ways of looking at something have occurred to me after that stepping away and
particularly the restorative power of, of sleep.
And what happens to your mind that time.
And that obviously just actually requires time. You can't,
if you're trying to turn around a decision the same day, you can't,
you can't sleep on it either literally or figuratively.
And so trying to maybe arrange your creative life or set things up in your work
or other places where you want to make good decisions and have good ideas to
allow yourself this time. I know on the muse team,
we often like to do things in pairs or each of us I've seen likes to
do things in parallel.
We may have a few different projects going on at a time that even,
maybe you switch back and forth between a little bit,
sometimes that can be lack of focus, which is a bad sign. But in some cases,
I find this as a really effective way to work on something for a while.
Maybe get a little stuck or not be sure what the best path forward is sort of
step away, switch my context for a few days or something.
And when I come back to it,
I'm fresh because in a way this background process has been working on the
problem the whole time.
Yep. And then bringing it back to tools for thought,
I think it's important then that the tools not try to draw too straight of a
line between ideas and steps. Often,
I feel like tools are trying to get the inputs in you form the right
connections. And then somehow the tool will like lead you to the right answer.
I think the process is just inherently much messier than that.
And you need to let go a little bit and say,
the tool is going to help you make this stew and then you'll sleep on it for a
few days. And then somewhere else,
something new will pop out and you might not even be able to see that straight
line, right. And it might not be reified in the tool,
but you have to trust that process is going to happen in your sleeping mind.
Another area under tools for thought,
I was curious to get your take on is the role of attention and focus.
And I touched on that with the system one brain and how it surfaces things to
the, to the system, to,
in the process of doing deep work and do going deep on a problem.
We know it's important to be able to focus on something deeply,
but how do you see that as interacting with a tool for thought like news or
these other.
W well,
now that you mentioned that my half joking answer is perhaps the most powerful
tool for thought that I have is industrial strength, noise,
canceling headphones, like the type you wear when you're using a chainsaw,
it's actually very helpful and blotting out the noise that I have here in the
city.
I'm controlling noise in your environment.
I think it was one of our very first email updates from use that we linked to a,
what I think of as a very useful tool in the creative person's toolkit,
which is a white noise generator. Uh, in this case it was one for the,
for the iPhone, but I've used a web-based white noise generator that does,
you know,
rainfall and fireplace crackling and whatever that I can put into a pair of
headphones, especially noise canceling headphones.
That can be really nice for particularly you're in a noisy environment,
like trying to work on a plane or a train or something like that,
because absolutely it takes effort to keep your attention on something.
And the more that your environment demands your attention, the more you,
the less effort you will have to spend on the thing you're trying to focus on.
That's why I like quiet office, physical space,
that's conducive to doing work.
I think if there's even the possibility that you'll be distracted or pulled back
from your creative thought process, it's hard to get into it.
I remember this one, I was a full-time programmer.
Even that I had a meeting on my calendar at like 3:00 PM,
made it hard to do certain programming problems in the beginning of the day.
It's because you knew at some point you were going to be interrupted and you had
to break your train of thought. I think there's the same dynamic happening.
If you know that that little red dot could come up,
or if you could get a notification pop on your screen.
So one idea we've had with music to really be respectful and giving the creator
control over if they're ever going to have anything interrupt their work and
anything else appear on their screen.
The reason I brought it up was I, I see this as, I guess, coming back to the,
this glorious vision for what computers could do for people some decades back
and where we are today, attention,
or really a direct conflict between what you want out of call.
It consumption technology.
So when it comes to your phone and your messaging apps and your social media,
precisely what you want is to feel connected.
You literally want to be interrupted. That is the feature, the feature of it.
You want to feel connected to what's going on and you know,
about the breaking news right away.
And when there's some important message from,
from thing that's happened with your team or thing that's happened in your
family, that you're going to find out, be connected to that,
be able to turn around and respond immediately. And that's well and good,
but it is just in direct opposition to what you want.
If you want to sit down and get a really big chunk of productive work done,
or particularly bring your energy and attention to bear on a problem that is
maybe just past what you're currently capable of doing,
whether that's a new thing you're trying to learn,
whether it's because you're an academic, that's trying to develop a fresh idea.
That's pushing the boundaries of science,
whether it's you're a product creator or a startup person,
and you're trying to figure out the strategy for your company or something like
that. You've got to,
you've got to really push yourself and you need every spare,
or you need every single cycle of your brain computing power you can get.
And anything that draws your attention away or demand your attention interferes
with that makes you slightly less able to go after solving that problem.
Yeah, totally.
I think a related idea on this theme of Headspace and how you're feeling is
the aesthetics of the tool environment.
I think it's really important that creators have control over the aesthetics of
their environment and can change it to their tastes.
I think if we told an artist that you have to go into this studio has to be
exactly the size. You can only paint the walls, this one gray color,
you can only use this one paintbrush, you have these four colors you can use.
Uh, you can only paint in the style. They'd be like, what are you talking about?
We do that all the time with software. Your environment has to look like this.
And by the way, it often looks, and it can,
it can feel trivial just to like to give you users this basic agency over what
they're doing in their environment. I think it's really important.
One small example from users, we have these setting panels type things.
And in most apps, when you open the settings type panel, you know,
it goes in the upper left, or it goes in the upper, right.
And that's that hopefully you're okay with it.
If it's covering some of your content well, too bad,
but we had this idea that even for something as simple as a settings panel,
you should be able to put it where you want to put it so that if you have
something on the right-hand side of your screen, that you're working on,
you can put the settings on the left or vice versa and just giving users basic
agency over like over their environment like that I think is really cool.
Yeah. I think one of our good switch research pieces touched on the desire for
creative types to nest,
where basically when you walk into the professor's office,
when you walk into the designers studio, you see,
tend to see an arrangement that reflects their personality.
They're certainly the needs of their work,
but also as a kind of home kind of a creative home.
And I think that connects not only to the utility of it. Okay. I,
I tend to use this one tool physical tool.
So therefore it's sitting in a place that's easy for me to reach my desk,
but also just reflects this feeling of comfort,
safety familiarity.
And I think you're able to do your best work and B be creative and productive
and focus when you feel those things.
And it's much harder to do it in an unfamiliar environment,
a sterile environment, one that, um,
when that maybe isn't adapted to your needs in the same way,
going back to Andy's great article about tools, for thoughts.
He has a section there where he talks a bit about sort of the machine learning
AI stuff. Now, I guess a GPT three is the new, new buzzy item.
And this is a question I think I've run into quite frequently in,
when I talk about what I've worked on, what I'm working on here at muse,
what I've done as well in the research lab,
which is to kind of oversimplify the response that often, you know, if I say,
I'm working on tools for thought and kind of describe what that is,
there's a reaction that's well,
pretty soon AI is going to be here and do all our thinking for us. So like,
what's the point of that. And I don't have a great answer to that. Uh,
I don't believe that in my heart,
but maybe that's because I'm incentivized not to believe it because I enjoy
building tools for people to think and create. So maybe I'm,
I have a little bit of applying dye to it, but have you run into that question?
And if so, how do you think about the role of let's say AI,
however you want to define that in tools for thinking and creativity.
There are a lot of interesting areas where AI is vastly superior,
but people are still really interested and learning.
So my favorite examples here are chess and go. And other games like that,
the computers now are insanely powerful.
People still love learning those games cause there's the intellectual challenge
and the reward.
And I actually think a really interesting frontier for tools of thought is how
do you leverage this amazing AI power to help people learn these games
faster in a programmatic way?
So I could imagine something in the style of Andy's pneumonic medium,
which is in his case,
it's using space repetition to help you stay at the frontier of your knowledge.
So you're kind of when you're on the brink of forgetting or when it's most
important to learn a concept is when it challenges you with a question.
I could imagine a similar thing, um, applied to a domain,
like a game where instead of having some linear and predetermined set of lessons
or problems, it plays you, it says, okay, these are your weaknesses.
You need to do some exercises. And these three areas,
I'm going to keep giving them to you until you master them.
And then we'll move on to the next area that can all be done.
Programmatically because these computers have a much better understanding of the
game than we ever will. Even experts.
Chess actually makes me think of this book.
I read a little while back by Gary Kasparov, I just looked it up.
It's called a deep thinking where machine intelligence ends and human creativity
begins and famously. This guy is both the chess.
One of the world famous sort of, um,
what's the word for a chess Grandmaster or whatever, the,
the highest ranked chess player in the world for, for a period of time.
But he was the one who was first,
the first time that the best human at chess in the world at the time was beaten
by a computer and many S really heralded that it was this huge,
certainly PR win for the people that were building these AI algorithms. Uh,
but for a lot of people that it really heralded the beginning of called robots
taking our job or the AI is going to be here or what have you. And he gets it's.
It's so interesting because on one hand he just reflects on the experience of
that just being, so I'm not sure what the word is for the, the, the,
he walks through the experience of grappling with this alien intelligence or
this thing that plays the game in a way that is so different from any,
how any human would.
Then he goes on to talk about how the game has changed in the year of sense,
which is now,
it's just taken for granted that chess computers are better than human players,
period,
but it didn't necessarily lead to a generalized artificial intelligence for now.
You just, computers are, can be extremely good at playing chess.
And that doesn't really seem to lead to something beyond that. You know,
you can obviously go from there to, okay, now they can play go,
and they can play StarCraft.
Maybe that does eventually lead to something general purpose. But the,
that the point you mentioned that made me think of the book was he talked about
how the game has changed in the form.
That really what it comes down to is humans and computers collaborate to play
their best game. They analyze, for example,
the games of the players that they're going to go up against.
So even if you're not using a computer at the time of playing the game,
your game has changed substantially because you have this computer,
I don't know what it is, assistant helping you in the training, the analysis,
the pregame, the post game. Um, and so in fact,
we're seeing that it's not really that chess,
AI replaces human chess playing it's more than it's,
it's just morphed the whole morph the whole sport, right?
And I think that points to the general future here, it's,
it's not AIS taking over all our jobs and our work is more of a symbiosis and
collaboration.
Perhaps the most obvious version of this is the AI is very good at generating a
bunch of plausible possibility,
especially when like GP T3 just spits out a bunch of texts and maybe 90% of them
are no better than plausible. Like if you read them closely,
don't really make sense. But one out of 10, the human can say, Oh,
that's actually quite interesting.
I'm going to that one for my business email or what have you.
So I think we'll see a whole wave of tools like that,
but otherwise I'll believe that the takeover of AI when, uh, I see it, uh,
productivity statistics, which of course we haven't for some decades.
Yeah. I think on the creative tools in tandem or in symbiosis with a
human generative design, I think is one area that has gotten some,
some buzz on that.
And that's the basic idea that you can feed a computer algorithm or an AI of
some kind, a set of constraints for a problem. You have, you know,
you're designing a building and you want it to be this,
hold this many people and have these kinds of structural qualities and have this
kinds of aesthetic qualities.
And it essentially generates you a bunch of options.
And then you can choose between them and kind of winnow winnow down.
So this is kind of assistive tools often that has to do with more the called the
brute force, the ability to generate lots of options and lots of weird options,
potentially, uh, actually one place that, um, I've used that thing,
not a out AI, but just an algorithm is in naming several different companies,
including Heroku and in-kind switch.
I basically wrote little programs that took some of our raw input that we
brainstormed and combine them together in every feasible way.
In the case of in-kind switch,
we knew we wanted two words separated by an ampersand.
We came up with every word for each slot, a and slot B that we wanted.
And I just wrote a program that spit out every single possible combination.
And we could go through them and look for what we liked best as that that's
pretty far from generative design, I suppose, but,
but it fits into this general assistive tools thing. And certainly one thing I,
I hear from folks a lot when they talk about this as, okay,
we we've come to accept autocorrect in our writing. Uh,
what's the auto-correct for thinking.
No, I feel like it's getting worse. It's just like, it's going rogue.
It says underlining random words. Now.
I actually did an experiment.
Some I got irritated enough with autocorrect in terms of it's great when it
works, but when it doesn't, it's way more effort to go back and correct,
or yeah, it's way more, more effort to get what you want.
I did an experiment for a little while of just turning off autocorrect on my
phone, actually, you know what I think I was about as fast,
I was like slower overall, uh,
or slower on individual words that auto-correct would have gotten.
But if you took away the correcting for mistakes,
a thing that I so often had to do it, I think it came out as kind of a net,
a wash.
And then also not being fraud there definitely an emotional win to not being
frustrated with the thing, uh,
autocorrecting person's name or what her for the 10th time.
Another potential angle on AI and tools for thought is via social networks.
As much as I like tools and software,
it's probably the case that the most powerful technologies, if we will,
that we have for thought are the social networks and the institutions that we're
participating in, the thoughts that we have are so influenced by our friends,
our colleagues who are talking to what we're seeing. And of course,
we're seeing a lot of that happening via social networks these days.
And there's a lot of ways you can say that's bad or troublesome,
and there's certainly some work to do,
but just something like YouTube or Twitter,
being able to help you find people in your area of interest to talk to and learn
from is very powerful.
And I think there's actually a lot more we could do in that space that is using
AI to build robust social networks that in turn helps you have better thoughts.
Yeah. That also connects back to the creative fodder idea. As we've said,
many times for ideas, don't come from nowhere, they're,
they're brick collage of other ideas. Where does that come from? Well,
exposing yourself to as many different ideas as you can,
through the many different sources as you can. Something like Twitter,
for example, is just a really amazing place to do that. YouTube as well can be.
Now,
I think it's hard or even impossible to have your own ideas or have original
ideas. If you're constantly plugged in, same thing is true at a,
like a work or a team level, your company, Slack,
your whatever other formats you have for connecting with your colleagues.
It's really powerful to be connected to that group mind and be
influenced to bombarded by and influenced by all the ideas and opinions.
But in the end, if you want to have an original thought,
I think you need to disconnect from that a little bit,
but to completely disconnect, you'll just won't have that fodder.
But if you're plugged in all the time,
you'll just never have an original thought because you're just being pushed to
and fro by everyone else's ideas.
And so there's some pendulum swing of connection to
isolation, where you can connect for awhile,
get all that fodder disconnect a little bit,
go a little deeper on your own ideas, come back and reconnect.
So thinking about the future,
we've already seen some exciting movement in tools for thought making it into
production or commercial environments with things like notion, Rome, Figma,
as well as great research work like Andy's work on pneumonic devices or
something like On-key the space repetition system that's kind of related to
that.
What do you think the future holds particularly given the public goods problem?
You mentioned earlier of how this stuff gets funded.
Are we going to enter a Renaissance where we can maybe finally reach the
beautiful vision that these folks from the sixties and seventies,
eighties outlined, do you think there's a new direction where things will go,
uh, is it going to continue to be hard to get tools of thought built in today's
world?
The economics problem is going to remain hard,
but not insurmountable at which I mean,
these things are inherently somewhat of a public good.
It's hard to fund them slash capture the value when you make great.
And I think that's going to be the case for the foreseeable future,
given the social technology that we have. But that said,
I feel like it's still very doable to make a lot of progress in these areas.
And it just takes a bit of, of will and vision,
and perhaps the willingness to forego maximum economic return for yourself
personally.
But I feel like even small teams with today's technology can make a lot of
progress. And I think we're seeing that.
And I think in the substance of the tools, I think first of all,
we're going to continue to see certain trends, keep playing out.
So one is this trend of, uh, mixed media and multimedia in the same tool.
And that's very important. I think with tools like notion and Figma and Rome,
people are becoming more and more accustomed to that,
and that's going to be baked in and we're going to be less tolerant of tools
that are strictly for one medium.
I think another trend that we're continuing to see is the improved aesthetics
slash the consumerization of industrial strength thinking tools, which again,
I think is great.
It needs to be fun, fast, a little playful. You could argue that mole skin,
which is, uh, you know, just a sketchbook company,
but I definitely count them as a tool for thought they're more expensive than,
but no better in a practical sense than a GP paper notebook,
but people like how they feel.
I like how they look and that aesthetic element makes a difference for, I think,
your, your ability to do good creative work.
Yep.
And one of the existing trend that I see continuing and accelerating is leaning
on video slash video games.
These are mediums that were hard to use or hard to produce content for even five
or 10 years ago.
And now that technology is such that basically anyone can make really high
quality content in these areas.
And so we're seeing more of more and more of that YouTube being the predominant
example.
But I think video and like slash the video game model will be interested,
integrated more into tools for thought and then looking forward. Okay.
I think there's a fairly obvious bet about AI that we talked about.
I think that one's been played out a fair amount on Twitter and so on.
So I won't go into that too much here,
but if I had to pick one less obvious trends to bet on it would be,
but if I had to pick one new trend to bet on it would be leveraging software to
enhance these traditionally non Tuli aspects of the creative
process. So the social side, the physicality side,
things like that.
I think those are kind of two pretty different worlds historically. Um,
but I see more tools, uh,
bridging that gap and leveraging the importance of those spaces for your
creative process.
Yeah. Very interesting. What are some examples of products or companies or, um,
tools that you've seen that tap into this community and people side of things?
It was often the case that gaming industry was the leader here.
So there are now these incredibly sophisticated communities around
individual video games where people follow creators,
who they're really interested in, and it started,
you just kind of watched someone playing the video game. Then it'd become these,
these social environments where there's a kind of community around it.
And then it becomes a way to learn how to play the game.
Like there's a bunch of tutorials and lessons and you learn from other people in
the community and you watch each other play and stuff like that.
And that's all mediated by technology because it's otherwise very hard for these
people to find their community.
Cause there might be a thousand people in the world who are really into this
niche video game and who are playing at a high level with the right tools and
platforms between like Twitch, YouTube, but the game itself, for example,
in discord, you can, you can form a community.
And I'll note that that includes not just playing games,
but also like speed running or something like that,
but also includes creating the games, many indie game developers,
stream themselves, programming the game, designing game on Twitch people,
jump in and watch that and learn from them. And there's also yeah,
huge YouTube communities and channels and things around just generally
learning to program and learning all kinds of technical skills.
Certainly I've learned things about video editing and things like that through,
through YouTube. So this kind of watch a creator or a producer use some
sophisticated piece of software to do some, do their creative process,
maybe thinking out loud as they do.
That's a really powerful way to share tacit knowledge about how people do what
they do. Yeah.
And then I think it's true.
Like you're saying it's trickling down from games into more like professional
environments or trade craft environments, things like you said, photo editing,
video editing or things like woodworking are now sophisticated communities
around that and online tools where you can learn.
But then I think bringing it back to tools for thought,
we're starting to see these,
these communities and tools form around more like intellectual topics and ideas.
So there's, there's a bit of a progress studies community developing.
For example,
now we have podcasts and classes and Twitter cohorts
and some slacks and some discords and those feel pretty early,
but it feels like we're bringing some of those patterns and sensibilities from
the gaming world and into these more intellectual.
Domains. Right. Well, that comes back to that.
I think when we say tools for thoughts,
sometimes you talk about maybe for example, methodologies,
how to work things like getting things done or inbox zero or building a second
brain or something like that. Um, so you've got communities,
you've got software that you run, you've got analog tools, you've got, uh,
techniques and methodologies. So really this is, I guess, a lot,
a lot broader than just as you said earlier, what goes in the rectangle.
And also I think technology is going to infuse all these other areas and we're
going to have a sort of technologies for thought, if you will, um,
both software per se, but also communities, networks, methodologies,
habits, institutions, Twitter threads,
and so on all working together to help people.
Well,
that makes me pretty excited for the future of being a thinker and a creative
person.
Well, with that, I think we can wrap it.
And if any of our listeners out there have feedback, feel free to reach out to
us@museapphqontwitterorhelloatnewsapp.com by email,
we'd love to hear your comments and especially ideas for future episodes.
See you later, Mark. See Adam.